---
layout: post
title: "How to be a Good Programmer"
date: 2020-11-10T20:41:10-07:00
---

I've spent a lot of time roaming around programming forums
and working with other developers. The way that many
developers think about their code is in terms of
objectives. How can I make this code be better? How can
I make this code faster? How can I make it more readable?
Don't get me wrong - these are all good questions to ask.
It is a **good** thing to be concerned with objectives that
your code fulfills.

The issue with problematic code is that the problem extends
beyond just the code itself -- those problems often stem
from the programmer. The way that a programmer thinks and
approaches problems drastically change the code they
produce.

It is really easy to teach people how to fix bad code. It
is much more difficult to teach them how to become a Good
Programmer, to the point that most people don't even
bother. I don't mean this as an insult to novice
developers - in many ways, this is more of a problem with
people answering questions on programming forums than
anyone else. We are enamored with the age-old adage: give a
man a fish, feed him for a day and all that. But the best
solution we've come up with is telling people to "Look it
up." "Look at the documentation." "Read this." "Read that."

Again, don't get me wrong, it is a *good* thing to be
helpful. It is *good* to give resources and to refer people
who otherwise would not know how to approach
problem-solving to search engines and the documentation.

However, this is a surface-level solution to a deeper
problem. Novice developers don't know how to be Good
Programmers.

# What is a Good Programmer?

Allow me to preface by describing what it means to *not* be
a Good Programmer.

*Not* being a Good Programmer does not mean you are a Bad
Programmer. But it can.

A Bad Programmer is unwilling to learn. A Bad Programmer is
not open to new ideas. A Bad Programmer is resistant to
critique.

If you are a Bad Programmer, you can safely close your
browser tab. I can't help you.

However, not all those who are *not* Good Programmers are
Bad Programmers. Novices and intermediate developers can
become Good Programmers. Even accomplished career software
engineers can become Good Programmers if they have not
already.

Being a Good Programmer means that you are an effective
thinker. It means you are an effective problem-solver. To
be a successful developer, you should strive to be a Good
Programmer.

# Why is it important to be a Good Programmer?

A Good Programmer writes better code.

A Good Programmer writes fast code.

A Good Programmer writes less buggy code.

A Good Programmer is more employable.

A Good Programmer enjoys their work.

# What makes a Good Programmer?

Every item in this list is connected, in more ways than
one.

#### 1. A Good Programmer does not follow a list of rules

You do not become a Good Programmer by using a checklist to
make sure you are doing every single action.

#### 2. A Good Programmer understands context

You do not become a Good Programmer if you constantly break
rules that you are meant to follow.

This is not a list of rules. This is a list of precepts.
These are things that are actions that are common amongst
Good Programmers. A Good Programmer does not refer to this
list every time they encounter a problem.

#### 3. A Good Programmer uses rationale

Understanding how things work and why they work improves
your intution of why it is done.

If you understand why these precepts exist, you do not need
to memorize them. You have the intuition that this is
correct way to approach problem-solving.

#### 4. A Good Programmer understands nuance

Every rule or solution has an exception. 

Many problems are more detailed than they initially appear.
It is important to determine whether or not precepts can be
applied in each scenario.

#### 5. A Good Programmer follows good practices

You should remember good practices because they are robust
ways to solve problems in most cases.

Good practices exist because Good Programmers understand
the rationale for using them. Departing from good practices
*requires* you to justify that decision. It is harder to
justify this departure than to simply use the default
approach.

#### 6. A Good Programmer communicates intent

Code should communicate what it is *meant* to do.

Expressive code is easier to read and review. Expressive
code makes it harder to write buggy code.

#### 7. A Good Programmer understands bugs

It is important to understand *why* the bug arose.

As the adage goes, debugging is the process of removing
bugs from the code. Therefore, programming is the process
of putting them in.

You are the source of all bugs. Therefore, you should
understand what lead to *you* to write buggy code.

#### 8. A Good Programmer notices patterns

Patterns are nearly never the result of pure coincidence.

There is a reason why patterns exist. It is easier to read
code if you think about it in terms of patterns. Noticing
patterns can help diagnose bugs.

#### 9. A Good Programmer is perceptive

Your understanding of the code and its behavior is based
upon observation.

In order to understand the code or problems with the code,
it is necessary to take note of the relevant details and
collect more information as needed.

#### 10. A Good Programmer is selective

More importantly, you should be wary of considering
irrelevant information and invalid solutions.

It is easier to reason about code when you are not bogged
down with superfluous information and constructs.

#### 11. A Good Programmer fixes high-level issues first

Problems should be prioritized by their scope.

Lower-level problems are irrelevant if a wider issue
exists. Fixing high-level problems lead to a greater
overall benefit for the code.

#### 12. A Good Programmer selects the correct tools

You should know when and where to apply different methods
and techniques.

The right tools make it easier to write good code. Good
Programmers avoid using the wrong tools because they cause
issues.

#### 13. A Good Programmer is capable of cost-benefit analysis

No solution is free of flaws.

You should be able to evaluate and justify why the benefits
of using one solution outweigh its costs and the benefits
of the solutions you did not use.

#### 14. A Good Programmer sees the bigger picture

Your code does not exist in a vacuum.

You should be able to understand the surrounding context.
A Good Programmer puts their decisions and their code into
perspective.

#### 15. A Good Programmer engineers solutions

The engineering process is an effective way of solving
problems.

You should be able to make realistic assumptions, design
prototypes, test and verify your solutions and iterate.

#### 16. A Good Programmer builds off their experiences

Your experiences are your greatest asset.

A Good Programmer uses their experiences to inform their
decisions.

#### 17. A Good Programmer sees opportunities to learn and grow

You should be open to adding new experiences and adapting
yourself to critique.

A Good Programmer is never satisfied with their own level
of knowledge. They continually seek further knowledge and
feedback.

# Conclusion

These precepts are not all that make a Good Programmer.
Learning how to apply these precepts requires experience,
and most importantly, time. 

These are only some of the examples of what many novice
developers commonly miss, but it is not an exhaustive list.
Luckily, it was never meant to be.

Keep these at the back of your mind. Take a look at it
every once in a while. You have already started on the path
to becoming a Good Programmer just by thinking beyond just
the code itself.

